Shyam ANAND
Kavuri Hills, Hyderabad linkedin.com/in/shyamanand +91 99866 11375 | shyam-anand@protonmail.com

I have designed and built horizontally scalable, distributed back-ends on top of RESTful API services; MySQL and NoSQL data-stores, running applications written in Java, Python, NodeJS and PHP, and deployed on AWS. I have headed engineering teams for a couple of startups, where I created and organised engineering teams, established engineering processes, and built tech stacks from ground up.
Experience
Turvo
Senior Software Engineer
Hyderabad, Nov ’17 - Present
Redesigned the dynamic configurations framework of Turvo platform, which improved the platform’s overall performance by reducing MySQL and Redis data storage requirements, and load times for front-end and back-end services. Wrote a library for the framework as part of the redesign, which is now used by all the other services.
Improved the codebase's Redis caching implementation by creating a framework that abstracted low-level operations and exposed simplified methods to use Redis without any boilerplate code.
Initiated efforts to improve code-quality standards of the company; developed one of Turvo's first automated code quality inspection tool using SonarQube, Jenkins and Bitbucket, which is triggered automatically when pull requests are opened, performs code review, and posts results back to the repository as inline comments, all without any manual intervention.
Part of the team that builds and maintains the new generation of features for Turvo, using micro-services based system design and has strict code quality standards enforced.
NowFloats
Software Architect
Hyderabad, July '16 - Oct '17
Led the team for NowFloats’ enterprise conversation platform, ana.chat. Used Spring Cloud modules and Apache Thrift to create a completely distributed, horizontally scalable micro-services based architecture for the platform, that could be deployed as a standalone single-tenant setup or a multi-tenant cloud setup.
Created a cross-functional team of web, mobile and back-end engineers from within the organization for the project.
Lookup (acquired by NowFloats)
VP of Engineering
Bangalore, July '15 - July '16
Proposed, planned and executed the re-architecture of Lookup platform from the initial monolithic stack to a distributed architecture deployed on AWS, removing frequent downtimes and scaling the platform to handle increasing loads.
Introduced tools like Git & Jenkins to enable continuous integration and improve development process.
Built and organised the engineering team; introduced Jira and daily stand-up meetings.
Worked with the product and design teams, and conceptualised product features and UI/UX design; and created design concepts from time to time
Lead Engineer, ZipDial (acquired by Twitter)
Lead Engineer
Bangalore, Sep '13 - July '15
Handled development of voice based applications on cloud telephony, which was ZipDial's flagship service.
Worked closely with the product delivery team and developed customer journeys for ZipDial's clients.
Created a re-usable internal framework for application development, that cut down delivery times by half.
Conceptualised, developed and deployed a custom monitoring and alerting tool for the 3rd party cloud telephony platform, which helped avoid down-times proactively.
Handled IVR platform vendor interactions, identified and fixed issues working with the vendor’s technical team.
Innoz
Software Architect
Bangalore, Nov '09 - Aug '13
Innoz was the developer of the award winning SMS based search and answering engine, SMS Gyan, which helped users find information on the Internet via SMS. I joined the company as the first employee while in college.
Wrote the source code of SMS Gyan from scratch, using a simple PHP & MySQL stack, which evolved into a distributed architecture (with applications written in Java and PHP, and using Memcached, MySQL and MongoDB) to accommodate the traffic of more than a million user queries per day, from over a hundred million users.
Directly worked with leading Indian telecoms like Airtel, Vodafone, Idea, Aircel, etc to onboard the product as a value added service.
Built and organised the engineering team into product development, R&D, platform and support teams, and streamlined the engineering process.
Hired engineers and team leads with various skillsets for all teams. Managed and mentored freshers and lateral hires.
I was featured on YourStory.com, one of India’s leading media platform for start-ups and entrepreneurs while working at Innoz.
Skillset
Tools, Technologies & Techniques
Qualities
Meticulous, yet pragmatic about code standards and quality. I treat tech-debt with priority, and clear them as early as possible.
Ability to collaborate well with non-technical departments; I have made product & engineering execution plans working with operations & sales teams, while also keeping the organization’s mission in focus.
Have managed tech and product teams of various disciplines; have defined KPIs and competency mapping for performance management & evaluation of developers.
Attention to detail and good aesthetic sense. I have conceptualised app UI/UX designs using Sketch and have built web UI using ReactJS.
Education & Certifications
Attended LBS College of Engineering (Kannur University)
for Bachelor of Technology in Computer Science & Engineering (2005 - 2009)
NIIT
Diploma in Computer Applications (2003)
Machine Learning by Andrew Ng
Stanford University | Coursera (2016) Course Certificate